---
layout: post
title: Parson
description: A simple and compact C library for JSON processing
cover: dragon.jpg
comments: true
categories:
- Programming
tags:
- JSON
- C
- parsing
---

The soaring popularity of web APIs in recent years has made the use of
[JSON](http://json.org/) as data storage increasingly more common. Many of the
contemporary scripting languages, including Ruby and Python, support it
directly in their standard libraries; it is compact, yet pretty versatile
and also human readable, so why not use it? Personally, I prefer JSON to
other formats, such as XML. But what if you need to read it from C where
string manipulation alone is a pain? As it turns out, there is quite a
[selection](http://json.org/) of libraries available.  Today, I would
like to introduce to you my favourite one.

## Simple and Lightweight

[Parson](https://github.com/kgabis/parson) has a simple and very descriptive
interface. All you need to read is this [100
lines-long](https://github.com/kgabis/parson/blob/master/parson.h) header file
and you pretty much know how to use it. The API comprises a set of functions to
traverse through your data either by stepping through the hierarchy of objects
and arrays one level at a time, or using the familiar **dot.notation** to
access a key deep in the structure without having to unwrap each layer of it.

Parson is very compact as it is only made up by two files. That makes it
easy to integrate in you project (hello [git
submodules](http://git-scm.com/book/en/Git-Tools-Submodules)) without having to
worry about external dependencies. The library itself doesn't depend on
anything apart from `libc`.

## A Complete Example

Now, let's have a look on how it works in practice. The following example is
the one you'll find in the library's `README` file, but with a main function
thrown in, so you can compile and run it easily (see the steps bellow). The
program will query GitHub's API
[endpoint](https://api.github.com/repos/pazdera/tco/commits) for a list of
commits in a repo, and parse the result (for simplicity, the query is just a
`system()` call of `curl`). It then reads the file and iterates trough every
commit. For each of them, the **dot.notation** is used to retrieve data stored
deeper within the object structure.

{% highlight C %}
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

#include "parson.h"

void print_commits_info(const char *username, const char *repo) {
    JSON_Value *root_value;
    JSON_Array *commits;
    JSON_Object *commit;
    size_t i;

    char curl_command[512];
    char cleanup_command[256];
    char output_filename[] = "commits.json";

    /* it ain't pretty, but it's not a libcurl tutorial */
    sprintf(curl_command,
        "curl -s \"https://api.github.com/repos/%s/%s/commits\" > %s",
        username, repo, output_filename);
    sprintf(cleanup_command, "rm -f %s", output_filename);
    system(curl_command);

    /* parsing json and validating output */
    root_value = json_parse_file(output_filename);
    if (json_value_get_type(root_value) != JSONArray) {
        system(cleanup_command);
        return;
    }

    /* getting array from root value and printing commit info */
    commits = json_value_get_array(root_value);
    printf("%-10.10s %-10.10s %s\n", "Date", "SHA", "Author");
    for (i = 0; i < json_array_get_count(commits); i++) {
        commit = json_array_get_object(commits, i);
        printf("%.10s %.10s %s\n",
               json_object_dotget_string(commit, "commit.author.date"),
               json_object_get_string(commit, "sha"),
               json_object_dotget_string(commit, "commit.author.name"));
    }

    /* cleanup code */
    json_value_free(root_value);
    system(cleanup_command);
}

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    if (argc != 3) {
        fprintf(stderr, "error: Wrong arguments.\n");
        fprintf(stderr, "usage: %s <github-user> <github-repo>\n", argv[0]);
        return 1;
    }

    print_commits_info(argv[1], argv[2]);
    return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

The `json_parse_file()` function will process the file and return its root
value. It is expected to be an array and we need to check to proceed further
`json_value_get_type()`. A **for** loop is then used to iterate through the
array of commit objects. During each iteration, we use
`json_array_get_object()` to retrieve the i-th object of the array. Because the
commit is a fairly complex object (see an
[example](https://api.github.com/repos/pazdera/tco/commits)), we will use the
`json_object_dotget_string()` functions to access values in child objects
without having to unwrap them first.

Follow these steps to run this example:

 1. Clone **parson** `git clone https://github.com/kgabis/parson`
 2. Type `cd parson/` to change to the repo's directory
 3. Download the example: `curl -L -s http://bit.ly/ZlkhnO >example.c`
 4. Compile it: `gcc example.c parson.c -o example`
 5. And finally execute it: `./example pazdera tco`

## Summary
If you need to process JSON files in C, this library is an excellent tool for
the job. It was written by [Krzysztof Gabis](http://kgabis.github.io/) in 2012,
and it's [available to everyone](https://github.com/kgabis/parson) under the
**MIT license**. It only supports reading at the moment, which is a problem if
you need to create or edit files too. There is, however, an unstable [devel
branch](https://github.com/kgabis/parson-devel) in making with the support of
writing, if you're one of the more adventurous types :-).
